these are healthy birds but not all the
eggs come out the same size and some
have imperfect shells so before they
reach the supermarket the strength of
every single egg is tested so I'm here
to follow this morning's batch of eggs
all the way to the packing center so you
better go off and start laying lovely
Andrew Jory is technical director at
noble foods here in Edinburgh they
process 1.2 million eggs a day so he
must have the x-factor absolutely not
holidays are rough but not every egg has
so much strength and weeding out the
weak ones is an extra big challenge
every egg is checked and graded this is
a huge machine so I can see that's
coming up there what's it doing well
this is the start of the grading process
right and the first piece of machinery
here what that's doing with a UV light
yeah is detecting anything that's in a
wet it's got albumin on right or it's
dirty it's marked in the computer's
matrix in a second and it's taken out
later right all eggs contain an air sac
but if it's too big the egg must be
rejected because it won't stay fresh
there's a simple test for this which was
once done by hand but now is done by
machine we'll need the lights down to do
this okay what we'd be looking for on
this is the size of the air cell which
is found at the broad end of the egg now
an air sacs formed because when an eggs
laid of course it's at Penn's body
temperature about 41 and it cools down
and then you get this little gap and
what we're looking for is a small size
of air cell because the SL will grow
over time as the egg gets less fresh so
the bigger the air cell the less fresh
the egg is right and the age old cooks
test was if you put eggs in water and if
they float then they're stale so eggs
are rejected if the air sac is too big
but that's not the only reason straight
away if I pick a selection there's a
huge egg looks like a walnut what's
happened there is the hens had some sort
of shock or stress whilst it was
producing the egg takes about 20 hours
inside the hen to produce the egg shell
and at some point it will have cracked
the forming egg shell and then it
carries on forming new egg shell on top
so you end up with this disfigured egg
but these guys here I mean the tool they
look really really good as a crack
they're mostly they will be hairline
cracks that aren't visible to the naked
eye
these defects are incredibly difficult
to spot but they must be removed from
the supermarket supply I'd never believe
they find cracked by listening for them
these detectors can hear the dull thud
given off by the dead eggs track
detectors work by by sound if you get
two good eggs and just tap them together
yeah you get a nice ringing noise if
it's good or a dull noise if it's broken
and on the machines you've got sensors
and they touch the eggs 16 times each
egg and it's listening it's like a
cotton really little bobbin it's moving
up down and listening to the noise it's
making and it's determining whether it's
a good egg or whether it's a cracked egg
48 thousand eggs farewell the crack test
here every day they're not strong enough
to safeguard their precious contents
during packing transport storage you
might expect all these duds to be wasted
but there's a big market for this liquid
egg because eggs are such a valuable
ingredient in cakes mayonnaise and other
foods so they're all processed right
here in the factory for such a simple
natural food I'm amazed so much
attention goes into making sure every
single egg we buy is checked and safe
you